# C Basics
---

- C is an unmanaged language; need to manage things like memory manually (?).

## Zipping
Package with
```shell
tar cvfz <dir>.tar.gz <dir>
```

where 'dir' is the directory you want to package to

Extract with
```shell
tar xvfz <tarball>
```


## Compiling
> We use GCC/G++ to compile. GDB to debug.

Use `gcc` to compile c code.

```shell
$ gcc file_name.c
```
This automatically generates an a.out file (binary) and a file_name.class file.

Can also change the name of the generated binary with `-o name`.

```shell
$ gcc file_name.c -o name
```
> The file generated by `-o` is exactly the same as the default a.out file.

Use `-Wall` to ensure that all warnings are caught. `-W` means _warnings_. `-Wall` means _all warnings_. Usually only errors are caught. It is best to always compile with this.

```shell
$ gcc -Wall ...
```

Use `-Werror` to treat all warnings as errors.

Use `-g` or `-gdpg3` to enable debugging.


## Running
Use the generated `a.out` file or enetered binary name to run the compiled code. Add any command line arguments directly after. Whitespace delimits.

```shell
$ ./a.out arg1 arg2 ...
```
```shell
$ ./name arg1 arg2 ...
```

## Makefile
A Makefile gives an easy way of compiling files with the `make` command.

Review code/Makefile.

## Main method

Main method returns `int` - returns `0` if ran successfully.

```c
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
  //code

  return 0;
}
```
`int argc, char *argv[]` is the equivalent of `String[] args` in Java.

- `argc` stands for _argument count_
 - This is how many arguments there are.
- `argv` stands for _argument vector_
  - These are the actual arguments.

> Note: some compilers allow for `main` to return `void`. Behind the scenes however, the compiler may replace the `void` with `int` and adds a `return 0` at the end.

## Imports
Imports handled using `#include <...>`.

Many "normal" functions in Java (that do not require any imports) need to be manually imported in C.

i.e. printing to console:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
  printf("Hello World!\n");

  return 0;
}
```

`stdio.h` is a _header_ file which stands for "Standard Input Output". This file has information related to I/O functions.

## Command Line Arguments
Command line argument is a string. More technically, it is a character pointer, eg `char* argv[]`.

- `argv[0]` is always the name of the program.

## Functions

Functions are declared similar to Java functions. i.e.
```c
void foo()
```

Functions must be declared (in some way) before they are used. Most simplistically, the entire function could just be written before its usage (ie before `main`).

#### Function Prototype
Another (better) way is to use a **_function prototype_**. This is just the function declaration with a semicolon. This is inserted before its usage. The actual body can be written anywhere.

```c
void foo();
```

#### Header File
A **_header file_** can be used to store the _function prototype_. Header files have the filetype `.h`.

```c
// Within a header_file.h
void foo();
```

To use the header file, use `#include "..."`.

```c
#include "header_file.h"
```

- Use `include <...>` with header files in standard include packages.
- Use `include "..."` for local files.

> Files that `#include` a header file have access to everything in the header file.
> > Lines in the header file are literally copy/pasted into the c file
